Find the Shaded Area
1. Problem
Original image: Find the area of the shaded region.
Meaning: The figure is a right triangle. A shaded rectangle is placed at the lower left, and its upper-right corner lies on the hypotenuse.
The remaining height above the rectangle on the left is 2 .
The remaining base to the right of the rectangle is 10 .
Find: the area of the shaded rectangle.
2. Method 1: Variables + Similar Triangles
Let the shaded rectangle have width x and height y .
Shaded area: S = xy
Total height of the large triangle: y + 2
Total base of the large triangle: x + 10
The small right triangle is similar to the whole large triangle, so corresponding sides are proportional:
Cross multiply:
Expand:
Subtract 10y from both sides:
The shaded area is exactly xy , so:
Shaded area = 20 square units
3. Method 2: Cut-and-Fill, Complete the Rectangle
Completed diagram: The original figure is extended into a large rectangle.
After completing the figure, we get a large rectangle. Notice that:
The height of the added shaded strip on top is the left marked length, 2 .
The length from the middle vertical line to the right bottom corner is 10 .
So the area of the added upper-right shaded rectangle is:
Now look at the slanted line from the upper-left corner to the lower-right corner. It is a diagonal of the large rectangle.
A diagonal of a rectangle divides it into two equal-area parts .
Therefore, the added shaded area above equals the corresponding shaded area below, which is the original lower-left shaded rectangle.
So the original shaded area is also:
Shaded area = 20 square units
4. Summary
There are two good ways to solve this problem:
Similar-triangle method: Use variables for the rectangle and set up a proportion to get xy = 20 .
Cut-and-fill method: Complete the figure into a rectangle and use the fact that a rectangle’s diagonal halves its area, giving the shaded area as 10 × 2 .
Final answer: 20 square units